.TH METEO.XML "5" "December 2001" "Meteo station tools" Othello
.SH NAME
meteo.xml \- description of configuration file format
.SH DESCRIPTION
The meteo station tools are described in 
.BR meteo (1),
this manual page defines the configuration file format used by all
the utilities.
The configuration file users XML syntax. A single file can be shared
among all the stations that use the same database.

The file contains all configuration information needed to talk to
the database (only one database configuration per file) and to
the station. In addition, it describes all the graphs that can
be produced from the data. It does not, however, specify how data
is stored in the database. In particular, id values for stations,
sensors and data fields, which are needed to build the key to the
data value, are only defined in the database.

The contains a mandatory top level
.B <meteo>
element, and meteo expects at least one
.B <database>
element and one or more 
.B <station>
elements within it. For each graph to be produced, a
.B <graph>
element should be placed in the
.B <graphs>
element.
Their contents are described in the sections below.

When used with the meteobrowser, a web robot running havoc (e.g. a
MSIE trying to read the browser contents offline) can case the system
to start many
.BR meteodraw (1)
processes in parallel. The following attributes of the
.B <grahps>
element allow to limit the damage.
The 
.I queued
attribute limits the number of
.BR meteodraw (1)
processes that may be
active at any one time. If an additional
.BR meteodraw (1)
process is started, it will exit without doing anything.
The
.I running
attribute allows to limit the number of
.BR meteodraw (1)
processes that may actually run in parallel.
These locking functions need a file name to attach the locks to,
which is specified by the
.I lockfile
attribute.

.SH "DATABASE CONFIGURATION"
The
.B <database>
tag defines the connection to the database, i.e. hostname,
database name and user names and passwords.
It also includes the prefix by which data from this station is identified
in the database. This prefix is also used for the graph names.
The section contains the following elements

.TP
.BI <hostname> dbserver </hostname>
The host name on which the MySQL server runs.
.TP
.BI <dbname> databasename </dbname>
The name of the database, usualy
.IR meteo .
.TP
.BI <prefix> stationname </prefix>
The name of the weather station.
.TP
.BI <user> readonly-user </user>
A user name for a user that is granted select access to the
.I stationdata 
and the
.I averages
tables. The
.BR meteodraw (1)
program uses this identity to access the database.
.TP
.BI <password> readonly-password </password>
The password for the read only user.
.TP
.BI <writer> readwrite-user </writer>
The name of a user granted select, update and insert on the
.I sdata
and
.I avg
tables.  The 
.BR meteopoll (1)
and 
.BR meteoavg (1)
programs use this identity to update the database.
.TP
.BI <writerpassword> readwrite-password </writerpassword>
The password of the read/write identity defined with the
.B writer
directive.
.TP
.BI <msgqueue> queuefile </msgqueue>
System V message queues are identified by a 32bit message ID, but this
is very system dependent. The
.B msgqueue
directive specifies the name of a file, from which a message queue
id will be derived. There are no other requirements on the file name
than that it exists.

Here is the configuration of the station in Bosco/Gurin as a sample

.nf
.in +4
<database>
.in +4
<hostname>localhost</hostname>
<dbname>meteo</dbname>
<prefix>Gurin</prefix>
<user>meteo</user>
<password>public</password>
<writer>meteoupdate</writer>
<writerpassword>secret</writerpassword>
<msgqueue>/tmp/meteodb-queue</msgqueue>
.in -4
</database>
.in -4
.fi


Further sections describe the graphs to be produced, and are only
used by the
.BR meteodraw (1)
program. The names of these sections are the graph names defined
in the manual page of
.BR meteodraw (1).
The contens of these sections are explained below.
Strings have to be enclosed in quotation marks.

.SH "STATION CONFIGURATION"
The station elemnt defines the interface through which weather data
is to be read from the station. It contains the following tags:
.TP
.BI <url> stationurl </url>
can be a file URL
.IR file:///dev/ttyS0 ,
indicating that a serial device should be used to communicate with
the station.
USB serial ports on Linux work also, the URL will usually be
.IR file:///dev/ttyUSB0 .
A TCP url of the form
.I tcp://192.168.7.3:10001
can be used to communicate with the station over the network through
a terminal server or device server, the example works for a 
Lantronix UDS-10 devices server.
.TP
.BI <speed> baudrate </speed>
This item is only needed for serial communication, and specifies the
baud rate to use. Older Davis stations (Weather Monitor II) use
2400 baud, the Vantage Pro runs at 19200 baud.
.TP
.BI <type> stationtype </type>
As weather station protocols vary substantially for the various types
of stations, and there don't seem to be reliably methods to find out
the type of station, the station type must be specified. Possible
values are
.IR WMII ,
.IR Perception ,
.IR Wizzard , 
.IR GroWeather , 
.IR Energy , 
.I Health
and
.IR VantagePro .
The
.I type
element has an option
.I crc
attribute. The value 
.I off
for the
.I crc
attribute causes meteopoll to send a CRC0 command to the weatherlink,
which is necessary for GroWeather which always starts up with CRC checked
commands.

The following
.I station
tag sample is used with the Vantage Pro station in Bosco/Gurin (which
uses UDS-10 device server):

.nf
.in +4
<station>
.in +4
<url>tcp://192.168.7.3:10001</url>
<type>Vantage</type>
.in -4
</station>
.in -4
.fi

The <offset> tag is no longer supported, the offset for a station is now
set in the station table in the database.
Please consult
.BR meteo.sql (5)
for an explanation of the issue.

.SH SENSORS

Since some stations have optional sensors, meteo must be told which
sensors to look at. For each available sensor, a sensor tag must be
included in the station tag. A standard Vantage Pro Plus has the following
sensors:

.nf
.in +4
<station>
.in +4
<url>tcp://192.168.7.3:10001</url>
<type>Vantage</type>
<sensors>
.in +4
<sensor name="iss">
.in +4
<field>temperature</sensor>
<field>humidity</sensor>
<field>rain</sensor>
<field>wind</sensor>
<field>solar</sensor>
<field>uv</sensor>
.in -4
</sensor>
<sensor name="console">
.in +4
<field>temperature</sensor>
<field>humidity</sensor>
<field>barometer</sensor>
.in -4
</sensor>
.in -4
</sensors>
.in -4
</station>
.in -4
.fi

Please read the file doc/sensors for details about sensors and a
complete list of sensors known to meteo.

.SH AVERAGES

The 
.BR meteoavg (1)
program computes averages from the data in the sdata table and stores
it in the avg table.
The set of averages actually computed by meteoavg and
the methods used to compute the averages are specified in the <averages>
element inside the station configuration.
Each average that is to be computed is specified with a field element
as in the following example

.nf
.in +4
<station>
.in +4
 ...
<sensors>
.in +4
 ...
.in -4
</sensors>
<averages>
.in +4
<sensor name="iss">
.in +4
<average name="temperature" base="temperature" operator="avg"/>
<average name="temperature_min" base="temperature" operator="min"/>
<average name="temperature_max" base="temperature" operator="max"/>
<average name="humidity" base="humidity" operator="avg"/>
<average name="humidity_min" base="humidity" operator="min"/>
<average name="humidity_max" base="humidity" operator="max"/>
<average name="rain" base="rain" operator="sum"/>
<average name="wind" base="wind" operator="wind"/>
<average name="windgust" base="windgust" operator="max"/>
<average name="solar" base="solar" operator="avg"/>
<average name="uv" base="uv" operator="avg"/>
.in -4
</sensor>
<sensor name="console">
.in +4
<average name="temperature" base="temperature" operator="avg"/>
<average name="temperature_min" base="temperature" operator="min"/>
<average name="temperature_max" base="temperature" operator="max"/>
<average name="humidity" base="humidity" operator="avg"/>
<average name="humidity_min" base="humidity" operator="min"/>
<average name="humidity_max" base="humidity" operator="max"/>
<average name="barometer" base="barometer" operator="avg"/>
<average name="barometer_min" base="barometer" operator="min"/>
<average name="barometer_max" base="barometer" operator="max"/>
.in -4
</sensor>
.in -4
</averages>
.in -4
</station>
.in -4
.fi

Each average element has the three attributes name, base and operator, which
have the following meaning. The name is the field name in the mfield table
for the value to be stored in the avg table. The base is the field name
of the field in the sdata table that should be used to base the computation.
The operator field describes the operation used to compute the average.
The following operator values are known:

.TS
tab(&);
l l.
min&sql min aggregation operator
max&SQL max aggregation operator
avg&SQL avg aggregation operator
sum&SQL sum aggregation operator
wind&pseudo operator for wind aggregation
.TE

.SH UNITS

Starting with version 0.9.0, units are configured in the database.
The following strings are valid for units:

.TS
tab(&);
l l.
data type&values

temperature&degrees Celsius, degC, C,
&degrees Fahrenheit F, degF, F, K
humidity&%
pressure&hPa, inHg, mmHg
wind&m/s, mph, kmh
rain&mm, in
solar&W/m2
uv&index, med
soil moisture&cb
leaf wetness&index
voltage&V
.TE

Releases 0.7.0 to 0.8.6 used information in the XML file for unit
configuration, but as the database should be useful independently of
configuration file, 0.9.0 moved this information to the database.

.SH "GRAPH CONFIGURATION"
The graphs produced by
.BR meteodraw (1)
are wildly configurable (perhaps not as flexible as with gnuplot, but better
adapted to the requirements of weather web sites, hopefully).
The options can roughly be devided into the following topics:
they describe the dimensions and colours, the axes and scales, the data
and how the data is to be displayed. There are different tags for these
tasks, which are individually described in the sections below.

Each graph description is contained in one <graph> tag. This tag has the
following for attributes:

.TS
tab(&);
l l l.
attribute&default&description
height&144&height of the produced PNG image
width&500&width of the produced PNG image
bgcolor&white&background color
fgcolor&black&foreground color (grid, axes, text)
.TE

All other information is defined in enclosed tags.

.SH "THE GRAPHWINDOW"
The graph itself does not occupy the complete area of the image, the
<graphwindow> tag is used to specify the part of the image that
can be used for the graph. It has the following attributes:

.TS
tab(&);
l r l.
attribute&default&description

llx&55&x coordinate of lower left corner
lly&19&y coorindate of lower left corner
urx&455&x coorindate of upper right corner
ury&139&y coorindate of upper right corner
.TE

.SH "LABELS"
On the left and on the right of the graph there is usually a label describing
the parameter plotted along the vertical axes.
The content of the <leftlabel> and <rightlabel> tags specifies the
labels on the left and the right respectively. There is a single
attribute, align, with possible values
.IR top ,
.I bottom
and
.IR center ,
with obvious meaning.

.SH "COLORS"
Every color in the graph in the produced images is configurable. The
syntax accepts normal rgb color specifications in hex like
#ff0000 for red, #00ff00 for green and #0000ff for blue. In addition,
every color can carry an alpha value between 0 (opaque) and 127
(transparent), which can be specified as a fourth byte in the color string.
E.g. #ff00003f means semi-transparent red, #0000ff00 is opaque blue.
It is thus possible to let the humidity graph shine through the temperature
graph, if the are drawn in the same graph window.

.SH "AXES AND SCALES"
While the scales along the time axes are completely fixed by the interval
and point in time, the vertical axes need to be specified by the
configuration file, or the configuration file needs to specify how to
derive suitable scales from the data. Note that graphs that change scale
from day to day are difficult to use in visual comparisons, so it
is often more useful to have graphs with a constant scale.

The
.BR meteodraw (1)
program understands the <leftaxis> and <rightaxis> tags to specify
scales. There are two groups of attributes that apply to these tags.
The first group specifies the scale, i.e. the way data is ``distributed''
along the vertical axis. The second group of attributes describes how
the vertical axes is labeled, and how grid lines are drawn.

In contrast to all other options, axis and scales may depend on the
time resolution. The optional interval attribute allows to include
several axis definitions in on configuration file, the one that matches
the interval length of the graph will be taken. If no interval matches
the current graph, then the first axis specification is used regardless
of its interval attribute. Thus if you want a default definition to
be taken unless the interval does not match, you must put before all the
other axis definitions for the same graph.

There are four possible types of scales, specified by the value of the
.B type attribute:

.TP
.BI type=" static"
The scale is fixed, data falling outside of the range is not displayed.

.TP
.BI type=" dynamic"
The scale is adjusted dynamically so that all data is displayed.

.TP
.BI type=" toprange"
This scale has a static range, but the maximum is adapted so that the
maximum value is always visible. If the data does not show a lot of
variation, and does not use the full range, the maximum and minimum
values are used to display a constant window to the data, that is moved
only if data leaves this range.

.TP
.BI type=" bottomrange"
As with previous type but for the minimum.

.P
The following attributes can be used to modify the scale

.TS
tab(&);
l l.
attribute&description

min&minimum value for fixed range, or default for dynamic
max&maximum value for fixed scale, or default for dynamic
minname&data set to use to find minimum
maxname&data set to use to find maximum
.TE

The following options are provided to modify how the axes are labeled and
grid lines are drawn.

.TS
tab(&);
l l l.
attribute&values&description

ticks&yes/no&whether or not to draw ticks/labels
gridlines&yes/no&whether or not to draw grid lines
first&double&first tick/label
last&double&last tick/label
step&double&step between ticks/labels
origin&double&
maxtickcount&integer&max number of vertical ticks
format&format string&how to format tick labels
.TE

The
.I static 
type uses only the attributes first, last and step. The
dynamic
formats use origin and step to determine the values where ticks
and/or gridlines should be drawn. The maxtickcount attribute
is used only by the
.I dynamic
format, which uses the following algorithm to derive the the step size
between ticks: if the specified step size produces too many ticks,
try 2*step and 5*step as step size. If that still produces too many
ticks, retry the algorithm with 10*step. There is therefore no minimum
number of ticks, to produce enough ticks, use a small step size to
start with.

.SH "CHANNELS"
While 
.BR meteodraw (1)
knows how to address time, station and resolution, it does not know
what data to retrieve for a certain graph. All the data, the computations
with it, and how it is displayed, is specified inside the <channels>
tag. It contains a <query> tag, which specifies what data to
retrieve, and <channel> tags to display the data retrieved.

.SH "QUERY"
The <query>
tag not only retrieves data, but also performs arithmetic operations on
it, this is described separately in the COMPUTATIONS section below.
The <query> tag contains <select> tags and <data> tags. <select> tags
specify select clauses for the database, and give the data retrieved
this way a name. <data> tags process the data retrieved.

The content of a <select> element is the SQL select clause used to
retrieve a value. In most cases, this will be column name in the
stationdata or averages table. It is possible, however, to specify
an SQL expression, to perform arithmetic or logic operations on the
data. Internally to 
.BR meteodraw (1),
the result is a set of time/value pairs for each point in time where
a value exists.

The <select> element always has a name attribute. The name is used to
refer to the data either when performing computations (in <data> elements)
or when graphing the data (in <channel> elements).

.SH "COMPUTATIONS"
<data> tags allow to perform operations on the data retrieved and named 
with the <select> elements.
One should look at the data sets retrieved by <select> elements as maps
from the time domain to the real numbers. Arithmetic operations are
pointwise, i.e. the result is defined on the intersection of the
domains of the arguments. The following operations are available as
separate tags:

.TS
tab(&);
l l.
element&description

constant&numeric constant
value&refers to <select> statment or previous <data>
function&compute monadic function
function2&compute binary function
sum&compute sum of all contained
mult&compute product of all contained data
diff&compute difference of two data sets
quot&compute quotient of two data sets
.TE

The <constant> element creates a map that is defined everywhere and
has always the same value. The precise function to apply is specified
with a name attribute. The following monic functions are available:

.TS
tab(&);
l l.
name&description

sqr&see sqr(3)
sqrt&see sqrt(3)
sin&see sin(3)
cos&see cos(3)
tan&see tan(3)
ceil&cut off data at maximum value
floor&cut off data at minimum value
accumulate&compute sum of all values up to a point in time
.TE

The last two functions take an additional attribute limit. The ceil
function produces a map which replaces all values that exceed limit
by limit. Similarly for floor.

The following binary functions are available:

.TS
tab(&);
l l.
name&description

atan2(y,x)&see atan(2)
azi(x,y)&azimut angle in degreees
hypot(x,y)&see hypto(3)
dewpoint(h,t)&compute dewpoint corresponding to humidity h (@T = t)
heatindex(h,t)&compute heat index from humidity h and temperature t
windchill(v,t)&compute windchill from wind speed v and temperature t
.TE

Note that for the most obvious applications, namely wind graphs, these
functions are not necessary, as the data is already in a suitable
format in the database tables.

.SH "THE <CHANNEL> TAG"
The <channel> tag finally draws the computed data in the color specified
in by the color attribute that all these tags use.
The mandatory type attribute defines what should be drawn and in what style.
Additional attributes are necessary to specify the date to graph, with the
exception of the
.I range
type (see below), this is done with the name attribute.
The following
types are defined

.TS
tab(&);
l l.
type&description

curve&draw a curve from a single map
range&draw the range between two maps
histogram&draw a histogram based on a map
lowdata&hide all data where the value is below some limit
nodata&hide everything outside the domain
windbackground&show wind direction colors
.TE

The
.I curve
type has an additional option
.IR connected ,
which defaults to no. If set to yes, the curve drawn by
.BR meteodraw (1)
interpolates accross time intervals where data is missing.
The default is to only draw a line where we do have data.

The
.I range
type needs two map names to fill the range between them with a color.
The attributes nameupper and namelower set the name of the map to
use for upper and lower bounds.

The two types
.I nodata
and
.I lowdata
require a name attribute of a map defined previously,
and draw vertical stripes of the color specified in the color attribute
for each point in time for which either the value of the named map is
below the limit attribute
value for the lowdata element, or which simply is not in the domain of
the named map.

The 
.I windbackground
draws the background for wind (this is a bit hackish, but I had no
better idea). The element requires the for attributes
.IR northcolor ,
.iR southcolor ,
.I westcolor
and 
.I eastcolor
with the colors for the winds the blow from the corresponding direction
as values. Furthermore it is possible to specify the
.I letters
attribute that contains the wind direction letters to use (in that
sequence) for winds from south, west, north and east. No letters are
drawn if this attribute is not present. The value usually used for
this attribute ist "SWNE". Note that these letters correctly denominate
the wind for swiss users: `Nordwind' means wind from the north, i.e.
a wind with an azimut of 180deg. Of course, this is a wind blowing to
the south, so some people may prefer the letter S for this direction,
or the setting letters="NESW".

.SH EXAMPLES
The meteo.xml and meteo-60.xml included in the distribution show how these
elements are used to produce the standard graphs as they can bee seen
on the home page of the meteo package, http://meteo.othello.ch/.

.SH BUGS
There is no tool to verify the correctness of the configuration file.
The easiest way to do this would be to provide a DTD, so that one
could simply check whether the configuration file matches the DTD.
In the meantime, the best one can do is to at least check well formedness
using
.BR xmllint (1).

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR meteo (1),
.BR meteopoll (1),
.BR meteoavg (1),
.BR meteodraw (1),
.BR meteodequeue (1),
.BR meteojob (1)

.SH AUTHOR
Dr. Andreas Mueller <afm@othello.ch>
