.TH METEOLABEL "1" "July 2003" "Meteo station tools" Othello
.SH NAME
meteolabel \- compute labels to identify graphs to meteodraw
.SH SYNOPSIS
meteoavg [
.B \-s
] [
.B \-c
] [
.B \-L
]
.I label
[
.I operator ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.BR meteolabel (1)
programm computes labels that specify the interval and end time for
a graph.
This program is mainly used inside the meteobrowser PHP script.

Without operator arguments, the 
.BR meteolabel (1)
parses the
.I label
and diplays it in a format specified by the options. By default, it
will simply format it as a normalized label.

The operator arguments allow to navigate between different levels
of resolution and in time. The following operators are known:
.TP
up
move up one level from the current label. E.g. the day label d20030709
becomes
.TP
upup
move up two levels. Note that moving up from d20021231 one level gives
week 0 in 2003, so that moving up again gives january 2003, or the 
label m200301. Applying the upup operator to d20021231 gives december
2003, i.e. the label m200212.
.TP
upupup
move up three levels.
.TP
down
move down one level from the current label. E.g. the year label y2003
becomes the month label m200307.
.TP
downdown
move down two levels, see the description of upup for an explantion
why this is different from moving down twice.
.TP
downdowndown
move down three levels.
.TP
previous
move forward in time, e.g. the week label w200314 becomes w200315.
.TP
next
move backward in time, e.g. the month label m200301 becomes m200212


.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-c
display the central time of the current label in 
.BR ctime (3)
format.
.TP
.B \-s
display the central time of the current label as Unix time in seconds
since midnight of 1st januar 1970.
.TP
.B \-L
suppress the default display of the label.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR meteo (1)

.SH AUTHOR
Dr. Andreas Mueller <afm@othello.ch>
