.TH METEOGRAPH "1" "December 2001" "Meteo station tools" Othello
.SH NAME
meteodraw \- draw graphs of meteo data
.SH SYNOPSIS
meteodraw [
.B \-tdVmI
] [
.B \-c dir
] [
.BI \-l logurl
] [
.BI \-e endtime
] [
.BI \-f conffile
] [
.BI \-g graphname
] [
.BI \-p prefix
] [
.BI \-u url
] [
.BI \-L label
] 
.BI \-s stationname
.IR interval ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.BR meteodraw (1)
superseeds the
meteograph program present in previous versions of the
.BR meteo (1)
package.
It computes graphs of meteo data for a weather station for various
sampling
.IR interval s.
Allowed values for the
.I interval
are 60, 300, 1800, 7200 and 86400, resulting in graphs spanning a few
hours, a day,
a week, a month and a full year, respectively.
By default, the graph ends at the current point in time, but this
behaviour can be modified by specifying an end timestamp with
the 
.B \-e
option in the format
.IR YYYYMMDDhhmmss .

By default, no graphs are produced, since with the much more flexible configuration
since meteo 0.9.x, there is no resonable default set of graphs.
The
.B \-g
option allows to modify the list of graphs to be produced, the argument to 
.B \-g
is the name of the graph as specified by the name attribute if the graph element.
The graphs are stored in files in the current working directory
unless a different directory is specified with the 
.B \-c
option. The file names are of the
form

.ce
.IR graphname - suffix .png

The
.I graphname
is specified in the configuration file, it is usually, but not necessarily
of the form 
.IR station . parameter ,
examples are 
.I Altendorf.temperature
or
.IR Gurin.humidity .
The suffix is one of
.IR hour ,
.IR day ,
.IR week ,
.I month
or
.IR year ,
for sampling intervals 60, 300, 1800, 7200 and 86400 respectively.
The possible  graph names are summarized in the following  table
If no
.IR interval s
and no
.IR label s
are specified, only the 300, 1800, 7200 and 86400 second interval
graphs are produced. This is because in most cases, 60 second graphs
will require quite different configuration files, as no maximum
and minimum values are available.

.TS
tab(&);
l l.
temperature&outside temperature
temperature_inside&inside temperature
humidity&humidity
humidity_inside&inside humidity
barometer&barometric pressure
wind&wind speed and direction
rain&rain total
radiation&solar and uv radiation
.TE

The parameters defining these graphs are set in the
.BR meteo.xml (5)
file. In the meteograph program, graph dimensions were hardwired,
and intervals of 60 seconds were impossible. Now it is possible
to specify almost any graph format, and even to use dynamically
adapting scales in the configuration file.

The data for the graphs is read from the averages table except for
the 60 second interval graphs, where it is read from the stationdata
table. While it was possible in previous versions to not use the
.BR meteoavg (1)
program and the averages table, this is now required.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-c imagedir
write image files to 
.IR imagedir .
Note that 
.BR meteodraw (1)
performs a
.BR chdir (2)
before opening the configuration file (as specified with the
.B \-f 
option below), so if a relative path for the configuration file
is used, it should be relativ to the image directory.
One possible application of this feature is to have a graph directory
for each weather station, and to put the meteo.xml
file in the same directory as the graphs. 
.BR meteodraw (1) can then be called with

.nf
.ti +3
meteodraw -c graphdir-a -s stationa -f meteo.xml 7200
.ti +3
meteodraw -c graphdir-b -s stationb -f meteo.xml 7200
.fi

to reproduce all two hour graphs for stations
.I a
and
.IR b .
.TP
.B \-d
increase the debug level by one. Debug messages are written to standard
error.
.TP
.BI \-e endtime
compute graphs ending at
.IR endtime .
.TP
.BI \-f conffile
Use 
.I conffile
to read the configuration, see 
.BR meteo.xml (5)
for the configuration syntax.
.TP
.BI \-g graphname
add a graph named
.I graphname
to the list of graphs to be produced.
The graphs produced are the
set difference of the set of graphs requested by the -g option
and the set of graphs suppressed by the -G option.
.TP
.BI \-G graphname
suppress the graph named
.IR graphname ,
but otherwise produce all graphs.
The graphs produced are the
set difference of the set of graphs requested by the -g option
and the set of graphs suppressed by the -G option.
.TP
.BI \-l logurl
send log messages to the destination described by the 
.IR logurl .
See the
.BR meteo (1)
manual page for the format of log urls.
.TP
.BI \-s stationname
Name of the station for which to compute the graphs.
.TP
.B \-t
include the timestamp in the file name of the generated image files.
.TP
.BI \-L label
derive the data and resolution from the 
.IR label ,
and compute the requested graphs accordingly. See the
.BR meteo (1)
manual page for information about label formats.

.TP
.BI \-p prefix
add the string
.I prefix
to all filenames of graphs produced.

.TP
.BI \-u url
use the url to construct the browser page urls in the image maps generated
by the -m option

.TP
.B \-m
generate an image map and image link for this graph. This is used in the
browser, where it image maps are produced and included in the HTML page
generated by the PHP script. This was previously done in the PHP script,
duplicating a lot of code that was already present in the C code. It also
meant that image dimensions were fixed twice, in the browser PHP script
and in the C code. Since all

.SH OFFSETS
The time values which are the key to the sdata values have a configurable
offset, as described in 
.BR meteo.sql (5).
When
.BR meteodraw (1)
is asked to retrieve data for a graph, it gets the end points of the
interval for which the data is requested.
These points in time are Unix time, but the sample at time t in the
avg table averages the values from (t - offset) to (t - offset + interval).
For the Lajeado station with offset -3h (-10800), a 300 sec average
with the key 106567600 (00:00 GMT on october 9, 2003) is the
average of data measured between

.in +4
106567600 + 10800 and 106567600 + 10800 + 300
.in -4

i.e. between 03:00 and 03:05 GMT on october 9, 2003. This corresponds
to 00:00 to 00:05 local time.

Therefore, to correct the offset, meteopoll needs to do the following:
If an offset is specified with the graph, instead of asking for
data between tbegin and tend, it asks for data between (tbegin + offset)
and (tend + offset). The points thus collected average data
from (tbegin + offset - offset) = tbegin to
(tend + offset - offset + interval) = (tend + interval), i.e. exactly what
we want. Furthermore, the time keys returned will be t - offset, i.e.
the Unix time when the measurement actually occured.

Again, for the Lajeado station, lets consider the 5min graph for
october 9, 2003. The first sample we need averages the data measured
between 03:00 and 03:05 GMT on october 9, 2003. Due to the three hour
offset, meteopoll has to ask for the samples between 00:00 und 23:59 GMT
to accomplish this. But in the graph, it has to use timekey - offset
to label the sample.

.SH BUGS
Dewpoint computations depend on the temperature unit. But since the
dewpoint routine does not know for which station it was called, it just
takes the first temperature unit specification it finds, and uses that.
This means that if you have one station that uses Fahrenheit, and one
that uses the default of Celsius, and you specify only the Fahrenheit
unit, the dewpoint comutation will assume Fahrenheit instead of Celsius.
Therefore, you should always use one temperature unit only per configuration
file. It is recommended to use the computing features of
.BR meteodraw (1)
described in
BR meteo.xml (5)
to convert to other units where necessary.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR meteo (1)
.BR meteo.xml (5),
.BR meteopoll (1),
.BR meteoavg (1),
.BR meteodequeue (1),
.BR meteojob (1)

.SH AUTHOR
Dr. Andreas Mueller <afm@othello.ch>
