.TH METEOLAST "1" "December 2001" "Meteo station tools" Othello
.SH NAME
meteolast \- retrieve recent meteo data from database
.SH SYNOPSIS
meteolast [
.B \-dxMEh?+H
] [
.B \-V
] [
.BI \-l logurl
] [
.BI \-f conffile
] [
.BI \-t time
] [
.BI \-w window
]
.BI stationname ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.BR meteoloop (1)
programm locates the last (or first) record before (after) the
.I time
(the present time if the
.B \-t
option is not present) for each station named as arguments
and formats it either as plain text or
as a segment of XML data. Standard XSLT style sheets can be used
to convert the XML data into almost any other format.
All elements on the produced XML are optional, as are the lines
in the plain text format. Only lines/elements for which there is
data in the database are printed.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d
increase the debug level by one. Debug messages are written to standard
error.
.TP
.B \-x
produce XML format instead of plain text.
.TP
.B \-E
output in english units.
.TP
.B \-M
output in metric units (the default).
.TP
.B \-H
add an XML header and a root element <meteolist>
to the output, so that the output is legal XML
.TP
.B \-f conffile
read configuration from
.IR conffile ,
usually something like
.IR /usr/local/etc/meteo.xml .
.TP
.B \-V
print version and exit
.TP
.B \-h
.B \-?
print a help message and exit
.TP
.B \-+
instead of search for the last record before a given time, look for
the first record after that time. Using this option without
the 
.B \-t
option does notmake sense: as the default for a search is the current
time, searches with
.B \-+
will look into the future, for which normally no data is available yet.
Suggestions for algorithms that allow to add such data to the database
are highly welcome, though.
.TP
.B \-w window
The program performs a query of the form
.I select max(timekey) from stationdata where station = 'Altendor' and timekey ...
Such a query would normally be extremely slow, as the restriction
on the station name causes MySQL to almost scan the whole table. Thus
the query only searches for timekeys between some not too distant point
in the past and the current time. The 
.I window
parameter tells it how many seconds into the past it should look. The default
is 3600, i.e. meteolast is successful if an update has happened during
the last hour. If data comes in with longer intervals, you should increase
the
.IR window .
Using 86400 for the
.I window
still gives reasonably fast results.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR meteo (1)
.BR meteo.xml (5),
.BR meteodraw (1),
.BR meteodequeue (1),
.BR meteojob (1),
.BR meteoavg (1).

.SH AUTHOR
Dr. Andreas Mueller <afm@othello.ch>, based on a version of meteolast
for meteo-0.5 by Jeff Wabik
