.TH METEODBDUMP "1" "October 2003" "Meteo station tools" Othello
.SH NAME
meteodbdump \- dump contents of meteo database
.SH SYNOPSIS
meteodbdump [
.BI \-b basename
] [
.BI \-c chunksize
] [
.B \-d
] [
.B \-r
] [
.BI \-f conffile
] [
.BI \-l logurl
]
.BI \-s station
.I table ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.BR meteodbdump (1)
programm dumps the contents of the meteo database (see
.BR meteo.sql (5))
to text files.
In contrast to ordinary
.BR mysqldump (1),
it usually reads the records of
a day at a time, i.e. less than 2000 rows,
so that the table does not stay locked for extended
time intervals.
Also the meteo tables tend to be so large that
.BR mysqldump (1)
will run out of memory before anything is dumped.
Furthermore, a dump into SQL statements is just too space consuming,
so there is an option to request a more compact load file format.

.BR meteodbdump (1)
connects to the database using the read only connection specified in
the either the default configuration file or the one specified with
the 
.B -f
option.
It then starts reading data for the station
.I station
and writes SQL insert statements to the files
.IB basename sdata,
.IB basename header
and
.IB basename avg.
Data is read in chunks of at most 
.I chunksize
records from the header (default 349), and written  to the header file,
then the station data in
.B sdata
and the averages present in the
.B avg
table for the same period
is also read and written to the avg file.

The SQL insert statements do not rely on a certain order of the fields
in the table definition. However, the contents of the
.B station
table and the
.B mfield
table are not dumped. Since stations and fields are completely described
only with this information, tools like
.BR mysql_dump (1)
should be used to backup those tables.

Without any additional arguments,
.BR meteodbdump (1)
dumps all three tables, i.e. avg, header and sdata.
The names of the tables to be dumped can be specified as additional
arguments, in which case only the specified tables are dumped.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-b basename
The
.I basename
string is prepended to the strings
.IR header ,
.I sdata 
and
.IR avg ,
which are then used as filenames for the output files. The 
.I basename
may contain slashes (/), but 
.BR meteodbdump (1)
will not create directories, so they should be created manually
before
.BR meteodump (1)
is run. Example: a
.I basename
of 
.I /var/tmp/Lajeado-
will let 
.BR meteodbdump (1)
dump the data to the files
.IR /var/tmp/Lajeado-header ,
.I /var/tmp/Lajeado-sdata
and
.IR /var/tmp/Lajeado-avg .

.TP
.BI \-c chunksize
read at most 
.I chunksize 
records from the database at one time. By default, 349 records are
read in the leading header query. This reduces 
.BR metedbdump (1)'s
impact on concurrency. Larger values for the chunksize cause the dump to
use more memory, and usually hurt concurrency noticably.
.TP
.B \-d
increase the debug level by one. Debug messages are written to standard
error.

.TP
.B \-r
request raw format, i.e. tabulater separated fields, one line per row.
This reduces the output size by about a factor 3.

.TP
.BI \-f conffile
use
.I conffile
as the meteo configuration file. See 
.BR meteo.xml (5)
for the configuration file syntax.

.TP
.BI \-l logurl
send log messages to the destination described by the
.IR logurl . See
.BR meteo (1)
for a description of the possible formats for log URLs.

.TP
.BI \-s station
name of the station to dump. This option can be given several times,
.BR meteodbdump (1)
will dump the data for each of the stations in turn. Data for all stations
will be written to the same files.

.SH BUGS
.BR meteodbdump (1)
terminates if a single query fails. This makes it impossible to dump
corrupted databases.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR meteo (1),
.BR meteo.sql (5),
.BR meteo.xml (5)

.SH AUTHOR
Dr. Andreas Mueller <afm@othello.ch>
